#Experimental design and background: 

The experiments were carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 
The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. 


#Raw data: 
randomization assignment, date and time of admission to the hospital, type of injury, fluids given by EMT/paramedic before admission, hospital, time of blood product administration, lot number of blood product, time of hemostasis achieved, other fluids, pre-existing blood clotting diseases, pre-existing blood clotting inhibitors, date and time of discharge from ICU, date and time of ventilator start and stop, date and time of discharge from hospital and date and time of death (if death occurred within 30 days).


#Processed data: 
Assignment was converted to treatment group (factor variable), type of injury was coded as a factor penetrating (1) or blunt (0), hospital was coded as a factor (1-12), EMT fluids were binned in 500ml bins, pre-existing clotting diseases were coded as a factor (each assigned a number), pre-existing clotting medications were coded as a factor. Other fluids were binned in 1L bins. Date of discharge from ICU was converted to ICU-free days (out of 30), Ventilator times were converted to ventilator-free days (out of 30), date of discharge was converted to hospital-free days (out of 30). Amount of blood products was summed in two groups, amount given until hemostasis and amount given from hemostasis until 24 hours, these were considered as numeric amounts, these were calculated from summing the blood product lot numbers, sorted by time of administration. Date of death was converted to 24-hour mortality (factor: yes=1 no=0) and 30-day mortality (factor: yes=1, no=0).

